Good evening. It is eight o’clock
and this is for Britain’s NHS
workers, carers and everyone helping
to fight this coronavirus pandemic
and keep the country going. Take a
look and let’s listen to the
enormous gratitude being shown right
now all over the UK.
APPLAUSE
APPLAUSE.
APPMUSE.
I
APPLAUSE.
I am in Belfast with the
firefighters of red watch and
central station here, out to show
their support for the other
colleagues in emergency services
that they have been working closely
with while responding to emergencies
24 hours
2A hours a
with while responding to emergencies
24 hours a day
2A hours a day during this time.
24 hours a day during this time.
Let’s
2A hours a day during this time.
Let’s catch
24 hours a day during this time.
Let’s catch up
2A hours a day during this time.
Let’s catch up with Alan Walmsley,
assistant fire officer here. How has
morale been for you and your team
duﬂng
during these strange times? Morale
is good. We are here showing support
to all our colleagues in the NHS and
it’s a fight we are all in together,
so we would just ask you to follow
government advice and let’s stay
safe. Thank you for coming up to
show your support tonight, along
with many others across Belfast.
I’m Sarah Smith outside Glasgow,
where a call has gone out across the
where a all has gone out across the
country for pipe
where a call has gone out across the
country for pipe to come out and
play Scotland The Brave, along with
everybody here applauding all of the
key workers who are keeping our
country going. Across the nation,
the same tune is being heard in
street after street, Scotland The
Brave for NHS.
ﬂ
lam in
I am in the middle of Cardiff, where
peopla have
people have come to thank not
I am in the middle of Cardiff, where
people have come to thank notjust
peopla have come to thank not just
NHS staff,
people have come to thank notjust
NHS staff, but the childcare
workers, the supermarket workers who
live in this street. Everyone has a
connection to the NHS. In some parts
of Walas
of Wales they are not just
connection to the NHS. In some parts
of Wales they are notjust clapping,
of Walas they are not just clapping,
they are
of Wales they are notjust clapping,
they are singing the traditional
Welsh song about a pure heart.
People want to show their
appreciation. It is a well—known
appreciation. It is a well-known
rugby
mgby anthem
appreciation. It is a well—known
rugby anthem in another part of the
mgby anthem in another part of the
city and the
rugby anthem in another part of the
city and the national rugby stadium
city and the national mgby stadium
is being lit up
city and the national rugby stadium
is being [it up in blue in honour of
is being lit up in blue in honour of
the NHS.
is being [it up in blue in honour of
the NHS. Around the corner
the NHS. Around the cornerfrom
the NHS. Around the corner from
here, is
the NHS. Around the cornerfrom
here, is Cardiff City Stadium, the
football stadium, is going to be
turned into a testing centre for NHS
workers. People don’t
workers. People don’tjust want
turned into a testing centre for NHS
workers. People don’t just want to
show their appreciation, they want
to make sure everyone pulling
together gets everything they need
to get on with the job.
BAGPIPES PLAY.
m:
We wa nt
We want the service to know that HMS
Shoreham thanks our colleagues back
in the UK in the NHS. On behalf of
the submarine service and all at HM
Naval base, Clyde, thank you.
m:
We are 820 Naval air Squadron and we
are proud to support the NHS, staff
and the key workers’ fight against
Covid—19. Thank you.
Covid-19. Thank you.
So
Covid—19. Thank you.
So there you go, a national round of
applause for Britain’s essential
workers, the NHS staff, the carers,
cleaners, teachers, supermarket
staff and everyone else trying to
save lives and keep the country
going
Good evening and welcome to Question
Time. On tonight’s panel... Matt
Hancock, the Health Secretary, newly
out of isolation having had
coronavirus, and joining us straight
coronavims, and joining us straight
from
coronavirus, and joining us straight
from answering questions at the
press conference in Downing Street.
Elected as an MP in 1997, the former
Shadow Home Secretary, now
Shadow Home Secretary, new chair of
Shadow Home Secretary, now chair of
the Commons Home Affairs Committee,
Yvette Cooper. Donna Kinnair, Now’s,
Yvette Cooper. Donna Kinnair, Novfs,
professor and
Yvette Cooper. Donna Kinnair, Now’s,
professor and head of the world’s
largest nurses union. And born in
Uganda, a trained lawyer turned
daric, since
cleric, since 2005, the Archbishop
daric, since 2005, the Archbishop
of York, john
cleric, since 2005, the Archbishop
of York, John Sentamu. Now, if you
of York, john Sentamu. Now, if you
have been
of York, John Sentamu. Now, if you
have been watching, you will know
that this is not the usual Question
Time, we do not have a studio
audience, for obvious reasons. This
week, we have three panellists, all
seated at a suitable distance, and
this week’s pre—recorded questions
this week’s pre-recorded questions
come
this week’s pre—recorded questions
come from Rugby, because that is
where we were originally intending
to be. But we will also be taking
questions and comments via social
media, so if you want to contact us
with your questions and comments, I
will feed those into the discussion
as we go. We were watching the Clap
For Our Carers, and here in the
studio, we’re
studio, we’rejust want
For Our Carers, and here in the
studio, we’re just want to add our
quick round of applause.
quick round of applause. Thank you
very much indeed. Let’s take our
first question tonight, down the
line, a pre—recorded question from
line, a pre-recorded question from
Adam, who is
line, a pre—recorded question from
Adam, who is 22 and a student. Good
evening. I
evening. lam
Adam, who is 22 and a student. Good
evening. I am currently a Masters
student at the University of
Birmingham but
Birmingham butl
student at the University of
Birmingham but I also work part—time
Birmingham but I also work part-time
at my [oral
Birmingham but I also work part—time
at my local supermarket. During my
at my [oral supermarket. During my
shifts I
at my local supermarket. During my
shifts I encounter quite a lot of
customers, and therefore I am
wondering why Germany has mustered
over half a million tests per week,
whereas we have only managed
5000-8000 per
5000—8000 per day. Why does the
5000-8000 per day. why does the
panel think
5000—8000 per day. Why does the
panel think this has happened? You
were talking about this in the press
conference earlier on today, why
conference eartier on today, why
have we
conference earlier on today, why
have we lagged behind? Well, we’ve
got one of the biggest testing
programs in Europe, but there are
places like Germany where they have
been able to do more tests, because
they started with a huge diagnostics
they started with a huge diagnostic
industry,
they started with a huge diagnostics
industry, which is
industry, which isjust not
they started with a huge diagnostics
industry, which is just not the
thing that we’ve had traditionally
as a country. They’ve been the
as a country. Therve been the
European
as a country. They’ve been the
European centre of diagnostics,
started with over 100 labs in
Germany. But none of that takes away
from the absolutely accurate point,
which is that we want more testing.
I understand why people want the
certainty that you get from having a
test. So, we’re ramping up testing,
we’ve hit the goal of having 10,000
tests a day by the end of March, and
today, I’ve set the goal of 100,000
tests a day by the end of this
month. And to do that... Can I
month. And to do that... Can Ijust
month. And to do that... (“an Ijust
be clear,
month. And to do that... Can Ijust
be clear, because I did not quite
understand it in the press
conference, because there was a talk
of 25,000 by the end of the month,
and 100,000 by the end of the month,
which is it? 100,000 by the end of
the month. The goal was 25,000, and
by pulling together out of
international effort, I think we can
international effort, I think we ran
get to
international effort, I think we can
get to 100,000. 50 that is the goal
get to 100,000. So that is the goal
I have set
get to 100,000. 50 that is the goal
I have set today. And the whole
pharmaceutical industry is going to
have to help and play its part, in
the same way that we’ve got expert
manufacturers who have never
manufactured a ventilator before now
manufacturing ventilators, the
pharmaceutical industry, that
normally deals in other types of
drugs, like vaccines and what have
7°“-
you, they are joining this
drugs, like vaccines and what have
you, they arejoining this national
effort to get enough testing. 50, we
effort to get enough testing. So, we
do test
effort to get enough testing. 50, we
do test more, we’ve tested more than
France, the Netherlands, lots of
France, the Nethertands, lots of
other
France, the Netherlands, lots of
other similar countries, but there
are countries like Germany that are
ahead of us, and I think that we’ve
got to increase the amount of
testing. And that’s important so
that is what we are going to have to
do. To be clear, the aim is 100,000
by the end of this month, to test if
peopla have
people have coronavirus, not if they
peopla have coronavims, not if they
have had it, if
people have coronavirus, not if they
have had it, if they actually have
it at the time of taking the test?
It is 100,000 tests overall. Both
types of test? Exactly, on all the
different strands of testing policy.
We have five different strengths.
Essentially, there are two types, as
you
Fssentially, there are two types, as
you 5“-
Essentially, there are two types, as
you say, there is either the swab
test to see if you have got it or a
blood test to see if you have had
it. But the latter, the science
isn’t yet developed enough for those
tests to be in large scale good
enough not to give false results,
which is worse than having no test
at all, because it gives false
comfort. So, just to be clear, the
25,000 is to see if people have the
25,000 is to see if peopla have the
symptoms? If
25,000 is to see if people have the
symptoms? If people actually have
symptoms? If peopla actually have
it? That
symptoms? If people actually have
it? That was the old goal. The
policy is really clear. It is that
by the end of this month, we are
going to have 100,000 tests per day.
That is what we need to do as a
country. To test if people have got
coronavirus and if they have had it?
The whola
The whole lot. Both types of tests.
Yvette? I strongly welcome the
measures announced by Matt today,
the commitment to broadening the
number of organisations that are
involved in doing the testing, the
universities, the private sector,
the charitable sector, all of that,
the charitabla sector, all of that,
I think it
the charitable sector, all of that,
I think it is really good and really
important. If we’re honest, this has
been hugely frustrating, the whole
been hugely fmstrating, the whole
process up
been hugely frustrating, the whole
process up to now and the confusion
about the testing, but actually to
have that commitment to broaden it
out is really welcome because I
think the centralised approach and
just using Public Health England,
therre
they’re doing a great
just using Public Health England,
they’re doing a greatjob but it is
therre doing a great job but it is
just not
they’re doing a greatjob but it is
just not enough to do the scale of
the tests that we could clearly
the tests that we could dearty
need.
the tests that we could clearly
need. But I still have, look, there
are questions about how and why we
got to hear and so on, but putting
those aside, because the important
thing is where we go now — I still
thing is where we go now - I still
have a big
thing is where we go now — I still
have a big question about the
overall objective with this, and how
this testing fits into the wider
strategy. Because I’m not sure what
your plan is around the community
testing, is the community testing
just going to be the antibodies, the
have you had it, are you now immune?
And is it an immunity test for the
community? Or is the community
testing strategy about whether
peopla
people are infectious, the Count of
peopla are infectious, the Count of
South
people are infectious, the Count of
South Korea strategy, testing
people, tracing the contacts and so
peoplc, tracing the contacts and so
on, which
people, tracing the contacts and so
on, which the WA WHO has always
rallad
called for? There has been this
debate in Britain about really
whether the Govan strategy was
immunity, or
immunity, orwhether
whether the Govan strategy was
immunity, or whether it was a
suppression, and it has never really
been clear to us, and I am still not
clear with this testing strategy
whether you are pursuing immunity,
or whether you’re pursuing
suppression, as the ultimate
objective. To be really clear, we
are bending the curve down, so if
you like, all it
you like, cell it what you will, it
you like, all it what you will, it
is about
you like, cell it what you will, it
is about getting the curve of the
virus down, to slow the spread. It
is not about trying to achieve
immunity of the whole population.
immunity of the whola population.
It’s
immunity of the whole population.
It’s about trying to get the curve
down and to protect lives. And to do
that, you need both types of test,
exactly as you say. You need both
the tests to test if people have had
the tests to test if peopla have had
it, and
the tests to test if people have had
it, and therefore they are likely to
be immune, like hopefully I am. But
to get lots of those, people keep
trying to sell me these tests,
PNQMNCY
pregnancy type tests, we keep
checking whether they work, and so
far we haven’t found one that works.
And then also ramping up the
so—called swab test, up your nose,
so-ralled swab test, up your nose,
to find out
so—called swab test, up your nose,
to find out if
so-ralled swab test, up your nose,
to find out if you
so—called swab test, up your nose,
to find out if you currently have
the vims.
the virus. Both of those are very
the vims. Both of those are very
important. So,
the virus. Both of those are very
important. 50, the community testing
important. So, the community testing
of the
important. 50, the community testing
of the current
important. So, the community testing
of the current infection, are you
planning to increase the tracing and
so on as well? I understand,
ﬂattening
flattening the curve, absolutely
ﬂattening the curve, absolutely
right,
flattening the curve, absolutely
right, everybody wants to make sure
that the NHS can cope, and they are
that the NHS ran cope, and they are
the
that the NHS can cope, and they are
the heroes dealing with this at the
moment. But in terms of how we come
out of the lockdown, how we come
through this, is it by getting more
peopla to
people to have had it, which seems
peopla to have had it, which seems
to be --
people to have had it, which seems
to be —— seem to be the government
to be -- seem to be the government
strategy at the
to be —— seem to be the government
strategy at the beginning, which was
worrying, or is it that we get to a
point where we can do proper
point where we ran do proper
community
point where we can do proper
community testing and tracing? And
if it’s the second, which I hope it
is, that’s great... I don’t even
need to be here! These are the
questions I wanted to get answered.
If you get that level of community
testing and tracing for infection,
don’t you need to go way, way beyond
the 100,000 that you’re talking
about at the moment? Shouldn’t we be
setting a much bigger objective even
if we can’t get there in a month?
Yes, we have a goal of 250,000 but I
Yes, we have a goal of250,000 but I
wanted to put a
Yes, we have a goal of 250,000 but I
wanted to put a timeframe on it and
I wanted to say to my team, to the
I wanted to sayto my team, to the
team at
I wanted to say to my team, to the
team at Public Health England, who
have been brilliant on this, to the
NHS and to the life sciences
industry and the companies involved,
and the charities, all the rest of
them, this is our collective goal,
them, this is our collactive goal,
put a date on it,
them, this is our collective goal,
put a date on it, put a number on
it. I
it. lam
put a date on it, put a number on
it. I am the one who has put that
meat, I have
meet, I have said
it. I am the one who has put that
meat, I have said that this is our
goal and we have now got to make it
happen. And there is one further
really important point in this,
which is that of course, getting to
broad community testing is important
and is the goal, but we have to
prioritise the tests that we’ve got,
starting with the patient for whom
it could be a life or death matter,
then the critical NHS staff, then
key workers, and once we’ve got
enough tests for all of them, we can
enough tests for all of them, we ran
then get to the
enough tests for all of them, we can
then get to the community. On that
point, Donna... It is important to
point, Donna... It is importantto
remember
point, Donna... It is important to
remember that people coming into the
hospital, come in from the
community. So, there is Covid—19 in
community. So, there is Covid-19 in
the community.
community. So, there is Covid—19 in
the community. So, we do have to
test the community, because it’s not
just existing in hospital. If you
look across, many of the people that
look across, many of the peoplo that
are getting
look across, many of the people that
are getting Covid—19 are in the
are getting Covid-19 are in the
community.
are getting Covid—19 are in the
community. One thing you and I know
is that it is important, if your
child has got a cough or you have
got a cough, that you understand
what it is, because neither do you
want to be a spreader, neither do
you want to self—isolate for M
you want to self-isolate for 14
days, unless
you want to self—isolate for M
days, unless you know that you’ve
got it. So it’s hugely important and
we are going to have to ramp up the
tests across the community. We have
focused on the hospitals because we
know it is a place where it is
spreading, but equally, we know that
one in ten healthcare workers are
one in ten healthrare workers are
also peopla
one in ten healthcare workers are
also people that are spreading the
also peopla that are spreading the
virus, so
also people that are spreading the
virus, so we need the tests both in
the community and in hospitals. I
noticed that Matt, you would not
commit to saying when health workers
would get the coronavirus test that
they require, as many as they felt
they needed in order to be able to
see if they have got symptoms,
whether they can come back to work,
whether they ran come back to work,
what is your
whether they can come back to work,
what is your feeling about that,
Donna? Well, we have to get it,
because if we don’t, we want to be
able to work. We know that although
the figures are getting better from
this evening’s press conference, we
know that at anyone time, between
25%
2596 and
know that at anyone time, between
25% and 40% of our healthcare
workers are self—isolating. How does
workers are self-isolating. How does
that tally with
workers are self—isolating. How does
that tally with the figure that you
gave at the press conference?
gave at the press conference? 5.7%
gave at the press conference? 5.796
of
gave at the press conference? 5.7%
of doctors. And 8% of all NHS staff.
of doctors. And 896 of all NHS staff.
On Monday
of doctors. And 8% of all NHS staff.
On Monday we were told that it was
2511. Yet,
25%. Yet, but that survey was not an
2596. Yet, but that survey was not an
accurate survey.
25%. Yet, but that survey was not an
accurate survey. And so I wanted to
get that figure and explain it to
the public. Because 8% is much lower
the public. Because 896 is much lower
than peopla
the public. Because 8% is much lower
than people had previously reported,
but it is still a high figure, and
this is why Donna is completely
right about the need for the testing
within the NHS, and then once we’ve
got to that, then we can keep the
got to that, then we ran keep the
numbers
got to that, then we can keep the
numbers going up and keep expanding.
john, I
john, Iwant
numbers going up and keep expanding.
john, I want to
John, I want to come to you in a
john, I want to come to you in a
minute. I
minute. lam
john, I want to come to you in a
minute. Iamjust
John, I want to come to you in a
minute. I am just going to read out
some of the tweets and comments that
we are getting coming in. This one —
we are getting coming in. This one -
would you agree
we are getting coming in. This one —
would you agree that you were slow
off the mark? You knew that this was
coming, and testing and ventilators
were requested at a late stage. This
one... Isn’t it that we started on
the wrong track with heard immunity
and then changed track? This meant
we were at the back of the queue for
buying tests. This one... 100,000
tests per day right now, why can’t
we.
we, is it lack of money, lack of
testing kits? What is your view on
testing kits? what is your view on
all of this,
testing kits? What is your view on
all of this, John? First of all, I
all of this, john? First of all, I
want to begin
all of this, John? First of all, I
want to begin by praising the NHS
staff, and in my book, they should
get the tests, they should be a
priority, just like the patients.
Because they are putting their lives
in great danger and because of their
vocation, so
vocation, sol
in great danger and because of their
vocation, so I would have thought
the priority should have been,
really, the patient and all those
who are on the front line, plus
those working in social care. I
those working in social rare. I
think
those working in social care. I
think the testing should happen. And
in the end, I don’t think that the
government could have prepared
better. You can do your best, but
better. You ran do your best, but
when it
better. You can do your best, but
when it happens, it hits you pretty
hard. It’s almost like having an
earthquake, you can prepare as much
earthquake, you ran prepare as much
as you like, but
earthquake, you can prepare as much
as you like, but until it happens...
One thing the government hasn’t done
is to do what Kitchener did — your
is to do what Kitchener did - your
country needs
is to do what Kitchener did — your
country needs you. And so, we have
galvanised, the industries,
everything, but we are coming to you
slightly late. When we had, for
slightly late. when we had, for
example,
slightly late. When we had, for
example, Formula 1, Mercedes—Benz,
example, Formula 1, Mercedes-Benz,
saying they are
example, Formula 1, Mercedes—Benz,
saying they are capable of producing
breathing equipment, they can
breathing equipment, they ran
produce a
breathing equipment, they can
produce a thousand a day, there are
many other companies that actually
could, without relying on things
coming from overseas. So you need
now to galvanise all the industries
and all the scientists and everybody
else and say, we have a war with
this invisible danger, and therefore
we want you to do everything that
you ran, and
you can, and so, for the rest of us,
you ran, and so, for the rest of us,
who are not on
you can, and so, for the rest of us,
who are not on the front line, we
need to do exactly what you say —
need to do exactly what you say -
staying at
need to do exactly what you say —
staying at home, protecting the NHS
and children and saving lives. This
is what we can do. But collectively,
is what we ran do. But collactively,
this country
is what we can do. But collectively,
this country could manufacture some
of that stuff pretty fast, pretty
quickly, if all the industries were
invited to come to the table. 50 I
invited to come to the tabla. So I
think you come
invited to come to the table. 50 I
think you come to it a bit late, you
should have really done it. For the
things we’ve done so far, I
things we’ve done so far, Ijust
want to say some of them,
particularly that you gave the
responsibility to science, you
didn’t ignore the scientists that
needed to come, and I think we would
have had already personal protection
equipment much faster, because in
this country, there is things can be
manufactured very quickly and very
fast. And with the army, should have
found somebody who is good in
logistic, in a
logistics, in a battle, to
distribute things, to be in charge
of it and not
of it and notjust
distribute things, to be in charge
of it and not just the
of it and notjust the health
professionals, because their role is
to heal. Have you found a great
brigadier or a major commanding the
distribution of all of this and not
just relying on a haphazard way of
doing it?
ﬂ
I agree so much. We have, we’ve got
Brigadier Phil Prosser, a remarkable
Brigadier Phil Prosser, a remarkabla
man, who is
Brigadier Phil Prosser, a remarkable
man, who is in charge of the
logistical effort of getting this
protective equipment out, and the
army have been brilliant in
responding to this. But do you also
agree with
agree withJohn that
responding to this. But do you also
agree with John that you’ve
agree withJohn that you’ve come to
agree with john that you’ve come to
this a bit
agree withJohn that you’ve come to
this a bit late? I think it’s a bit
unfair. On the testing, for
instance, we’ve had the private
companies, the testing, the British
diagnostic companies, involved in
this from the
this from the start. We just have to
fast the
cast the net wider and wider to get
fast the net wider and wider to get
things going
cast the net wider and wider to get
things going faster and faster, so,
for instance, the universities and
university labs, they’ve been
involved. Companies that are like
Thermo Fisher, 3 global
Thermo Fisher, a global company like
ran docks,
Thermo Fisher, 3 global company like
ran docks, which is a British
m"WWW-
company, they’ve been involved for a
company, therve been involved for a
long time, but I
company, they’ve been involved for a
long time, but I agree. I say that
to explain what we’ve been doing,
but I agree with the Archbishop’s
point, which is this really is a
national effort. Everybody can play
national effort. Everybody ran play
their part,
national effort. Everybody can play
their part, whether it’s by staying
at home, or whether it is if you are
in one of these industries where you
ran really do
can really do your bit, then by
ran really do your bit, then by
stepping up
can really do your bit, then by
stepping up to the plate. If
stepping up to the plate. Ifjust
one example, GlaxoSmithKline, great
British business, never done any
testing before in its life but
pharmaceuticals are obviously quite
close to testing, very briefly and
dose to testing, very brieﬂy and
did
close to testing, very briefly and
did some for the Olympics, and when
did some for the Olympic, and when
I phoned them
did some for the Olympics, and when
I phoned them up and said, you’ve
really got to turn your great
industrial muscle to this problem,
industrial musda to this problam,
they said,
industrial muscle to this problem,
they said, how do we help? Let’s do
it, let’s make it happen. That’s the
attitude that we need. If I may
still say yes, some stuff you have
done and I’m not critical of because
this is something you can never
this is something you ran never
prepare for.
this is something you can never
prepare for. What I’m trying to say,
prepare for. what I’m trying to say,
today, I heard
prepare for. What I’m trying to say,
today, I heard you for the first
time falling
time calling upon all industry, all
universities, all labs. Why didn’t
universities, all labs. why didn’t
you do that
universities, all labs. Why didn’t
you do that two weeks ago? That’s
what I’m talking about. Galvanising
together everybody, to me it was
today, not three weeks ago.
Literally two weeks ago I did do the
same cell but I obviously didn’t get
same all but I obviously didn’t get
it to your ears.
same cell but I obviously didn’t get
it to your ears. In this great
response to this virus, you know,
you just do everything you can and
you just do everything you ran and
when we
you just do everything you can and
when we come up with an idea and we
haven’t thought of it before, I’m
not going to shilly—shallying about.
not going to shilly-shallying about.
We just get
not going to shilly—shallying about.
We just get on with it. Actually, I
have to say, this has been true, the
response of the country as a whole
has been great. People haven’t been
political or picking things apart.
Generally the senses this is a war,
as Archbishop Sentamu just said, but
it’s a war on which we are all on
the same side and that changes the
“Y
way that we deal with it, because it
means we’ve all got to pull
together. I think that’s completely
right. This is something where you
want the whole country pulling
together and it’s why you want all
of the industry, why you want all of
the different organisations, and
everybody wants to be part of this
and wants to innovate. I guess the
only thing I would add is I think
you said something really important
today, Matt, when you talked about
levelling with people. I think that
levelling with peopla. I think that
does
levelling with people. I think that
does also mean actually also
levelling with people and being
honest with things about things that
should have happened faster or been
done earlier. That’s important
done eartier. That’s important
because
done earlier. That’s important
because it’s about building trust.
because it’s about building tmst.
Yeah.
because it’s about building trust.
Yeah. And when you are in a pandemic
trust really matters and if people
trust really matters and if peopla
think, or if
trust really matters and if people
think, or if NHS workers who are on
the front line with this and
struggling with the pressures they
stmggling with the pressures they
are facing, if
struggling with the pressures they
are facing, if they lose trust and
feel like they are being given a
line from a press release or
whatever, it makes it much harder to
build that collective thing. So,
build that collactive thing. So,
whilst I
build that collective thing. So,
whilst I would strongly support the
measures you’ve announced today, I
think I would probably also urge you
to also be honest about the things
that may have gone wrong earlier on,
that may have gone wrong eartier on,
or may not have
that may have gone wrong earlier on,
or may not have slotted into place
as fast as they should have done.
And I think the impact, if you are
not honest, is we lose confidence.
So, people hearing about Great
Ormond Street this afternoon having
a problem with its cardiac suite
will lose confidence, because... Why
will lose confidence, because... why
were they
will lose confidence, because... Why
were they having a problem? We had
somebody who was infective operating
and that means the staff will now
need to self isolates, patients will
have to be tracked and contacted, so
it’s important that actually we do
have the tests available. I was
having a debate on Newsnight the
other night. Chris Hopson was saying
there is only two tests available.
The timelines for us to get the
swabs and having them on site in the
hospital need to be explicit because
otherwise we lose confidence. The
front line staff lose confidence in
what people are saying. I think this
what peopla are saying. I think this
transparency
what people are saying. I think this
transparency is really important and
also being clear about some of the
challanges,
challenges, right? This is difficult
challanges, right? This is difficult
and
challenges, right? This is difficult
and there will be bumps in the road.
I hope that by now these antibody
tests, the blood tests, you know, we
bought a lot of them. We bought from
nine different companies and it’s
disappointing that the first few
ones we’ve run are just not high
ones we’ve nm are just not high
enough
ones we’ve run are just not high
enough quality, but we’ve been
completely upfront about the fact we
bought them and they haven’t worked
and we’ll keep searching until we
find one that is good enough. It’s
probably fair to say there is a
confusion early on about what the
confusion earty on about what the
strategy was,
confusion early on about what the
strategy was, on the immunity
suppression... Never
suppression... Neverwith
strategy was, on the immunity
suppression... Never with me.
suppression... Neverwith me. In
suppression... Never with me. In
which rase
suppression... Neverwith me. In
which case there’s been different
views within the government and that
does happen. We understand that will
happen sometimes, but... Do you
accept that? Know, I don’t.
accept that? Know, Idon’t. I’m
happen sometimes, but... Do you
accept that? Know, I don’t. I’m not
accept that? Know, Idon’t. I’m not
going to get into
accept that? Know, I don’t. I’m not
going to get into the communications
of it but we really clear about the
strategy here, it is to save lives
by ﬂattening
by flattening the curve and building
byﬂatbening the curve and building
the
by flattening the curve and building
the NHS capacity. Let’s take another
question, a pre—recorded question,
question, a pre-recorded question,
from jennifer
question, a pre—recorded question,
from Jennifer Brennan, Asaph what ——
from jennifer Brennan, Asaph what --
a software
from Jennifer Brennan, Asaph what ——
a software company director.
from Jennifer Brannan, Asaph what ——
a software company director. What is
a software company director. what is
truth
a software company director. What is
truth about how our front line
workers have ended up without the
PPE they so desperately need? Where
PPE they so desperately need? where
are we just too
PPE they so desperately need? Where
are we just too late in placing
are wejust too late in placing
orders
are we just too late in placing
orders due to the incorrect initial
strategy? Donna, this must be
something you are hearing from your
members several times a day, I would
think? Yes, it’s probably the most
falls I’ve had,
calls I’ve had, the most e—mails
falls I’ve had, the most e-mails
I’ve had
calls I’ve had, the most e—mails
I’ve had and contact I’ve had is
about personal protection equipment
and I think we’ve been urging the
government for weeks now that this
needed to be a priority, because,
you know, you just cannot nurse
property,
properly, there is no nurse that is
property, there is no nurse that is
less than
properly, there is no nurse that is
less than two metres away from a
patient if they are delivering care,
patient if they are delivering rare,
so it was
patient if they are delivering care,
so it was really important, I think,
as jennifer said,
asJennifer said, that we ramped up
as jennifer said, that we ramped up
the personal
asJennifer said, that we ramped up
the personal protection equipment,
and also that it isn’t
and also that it isn’tjust the
intensive care unit, that we
sometimes get waylaid into thinking
because as we said earlier a lot of
because as we said eartier a lot of
the
because as we said earlier a lot of
the coronavirus, or Covid—19, is in
the coronavims, or Covid-19, is in
the community,
the coronavirus, or Covid—19, is in
the community, so actually if you
are going as a health care worker or
are going as a health rare worker or
in social
are going as a health care worker or
in social care
are going as a health rare worker or
in social rare you
are going as a health care worker or
in social care you can be coming
in social rare you ran be coming
across it, or you
in social care you can be coming
across it, or you can have it from
across it, or you ran have it from
members of your
across it, or you can have it from
members of your own family, so we do
need personal protection equipment.
Whether it was that we didn’t have
whether it was that we didn’t have
enough, I’ve
Whether it was that we didn’t have
enough, I’ve been assured several
times that we do have enough,
however, it’s the logistics. But,
however, it’s the logistic. But,
even if
however, it’s the logistics. But,
even if that is true, that is going
to mn out.
to run out. If you think about, you
to mn out. If you think about, you
know, the
to run out. If you think about, you
know, the number is as they are now,
we do have to make sure that we’ve
got a all to
got a fall to arms
we do have to make sure that we’ve
got a call to arms in this country
got a all to arms in this country
to be able
got a call to arms in this country
to be able to manufacture the right
equipment, because, actually, if we
equipment, because, actually, ifwe
don’t have
equipment, because, actually, if we
don’t have it we won’t have people
don’t have it we won’t have peopla
to be
don’t have it we won’t have people
to be able to deliver the care that
to be able to deliver the rare that
we need,
to be able to deliver the care that
we need, whether that’s doctors,
nurses, physics. They all need it
nurses, physios. They all need it
because they
nurses, physics. They all need it
because they are up close and
personal. What was your response to
personal. what was your response to
what
personal. What was your response to
what Matt had to say the press
conference today? So my response is
that, 0K,
that, OK, I hear
conference today? So my response is
that, OK, I hearwhat
that, OK, I hear what Matt says and
I believe it, to a degree, but I’m
still... To a degree! Because I’m
still getting calls on the ground
that says, yes, I had a supply
yesterday, but it’s running out and
yesterday, but it’s mnning out and
I’ve used
yesterday, but it’s running out and
I’ve used it all and that is the
issue. 0K, we can move millions of
issue. 0K, we ran move millions of
pieces of
issue. 0K, we can move millions of
pieces of equipment but it needs to
be sustained so that actually people
be sustained so that actually peopla
have it
be sustained so that actually people
have it tomorrow, or when they need
at the next day. There is no point
in ringing a hotline, as many nurses
in ringing a hoﬂine, as many nurses
have done,
in ringing a hotline, as many nurses
have done, and heard at the other
end we don’t have it to give it to
7°“-
you, so if we are going to tell
health care workers that this is
health rare workers that this is
availabla,
health care workers that this is
available, we make sure that it is
availabla, we make sure that it is
availabla,
available, we make sure that it is
available, otherwise it causes a
problem. Lack of confidence and
problem. lack of confidence and
people do
problem. Lack of confidence and
people do not feel secure in
peopla do not feel secure in
delivering
people do not feel secure in
delivering care. The reports we are
delivering rare. The reports we are
seeing about
delivering care. The reports we are
seeing about nurses rationing
whether or not they can treat
whether or not they ran treat
patients
whether or not they can treat
patients because they don’t have the
protective equipment, is there any
truth in that? I’m sure there must
be if they are reporting that but in
main nurses don’t like to ration
rare.
care. What they do is put themselves
rare. what they do is put themselves
at risk and
care. What they do is put themselves
at risk and often that’s
problematic. So, we will see where
problamatic. So, we will see where
peopla
problematic. So, we will see where
people haven’t been provided with
the equipment they themselves are
going down stop that means there is
a patient without care. We started
a patient without rare. We started
off with
a patient without care. We started
off with 40,000 less. We’ve had a
all to arms,
call to arms, people have stepped
all to arms, peopla have stepped
forward,
call to arms, people have stepped
forward, but if we don’t provide the
right equipment, in every other
country we’ve seen the health
workers go down first when you were
asked about protective equipment,
you said we’ll get it rolled out by
this weekend, 151 lorries or
whatever it was, I got the
impression it was sorted was I know,
this is another mammoth effort and I
agree with every word of what Donna
just said. Nurses, doctors, all
health care professionals put
themselves literally on the front
line and we’ve seen, very sadly,
four doctors die so far and some
nurses. They are not even counting
the nurses, Matt. I need a
conversation. Say that again? We
haven’t even counted the nurses yet.
I keep asking for the stats on
nurses. I didn’t know that, we will
sort that out. I am asking, we as a
nation are asking our doctors,
nurses, physios, pharmacists, to
treat peopla
treat people and to treat people you
treat peopla and to treat peopla you
do have
treat people and to treat people you
do have to
treat peopla and to treat peopla you
do have to say,
treat people and to treat people you
do have to say, as you said, up
close and personal. We have this
mammoth logistical exercise and it’s
true, Donna is right, that we do
have the supplies. We have a massive
sunplv
supply in an enormous warehouse in
the North West. We are getting...
We’ve got enough of it at the right
time? Yes, for now, we’ve got to
keep the replenishing it and the
domestic call to arms is important
domestic all to arms is important
here
domestic rail to arms is important
here as
domestic call to arms is important
here as well. We have domestic
suppliers who might have made
dosing
closing a couple of weeks ago who
are now turning to make protective
equipment and that is important.
We’ve got to keep replenishing it.
We’ve got to keep replanishing it.
But
We’ve got to keep replenishing it.
But essentially the quantity of the
stuff is not the problem in PPE, in
protective equipment. The challenge
is getting it to every single one of
the 1.4 million NHS staff, the over
2 million social care staff. It’s a
2 million social rare staff. It’s a
huge
2 million social care staff. It’s a
huge logistical exercise. If we come
back to the previous point about
transparency and openness of the
challenges, I’m completely open
about the challenge here because
getting kit out of the warehouse and
into the hands and onto the face of
every single nurse who needs it,
every single doctor, the right kit,
that is one of the biggest
logistical challenges of peacetime.
The reason, coming back to the
original question, the reason it
suddenly became a thing is that when
we put in the social distancing
measures the demands for PPE from
the front line suddenly shot up, so
peopla did
people did have local stores of it
peopla did have [oral stores of it
but they
people did have local stores of it
but they burn through that very
quickly. This is where the army have
been brilliant so far and I’m really
glad to say that the number of calls
glad to say that the number of falls
to our
glad to say that the number of calls
to our hotline has fallen in the
to our hoﬂine has fallen in the
last few
to our hotline has fallen in the
last few days, which implies that
there are fewer problems. But until
every nurse and every doctor and
every other health professional and
in social care, until they have the
in social rare, until they have the
protective
in social care, until they have the
protective equipment that they need,
I will not rest on this one. Yes, we
got the emergency supplies two weeks
at a go, we got cracking, but this
is an ongoing problem that we are
going to have to just keep working
at all the way through this. And
john, it’s a
John, it’s a huge logistical
john, it’s a huge logistical
problam,
John, it’s a huge logistical
problem, isn’t it? A logistical
problam, isn’t it? A logistical
challange,
problem, isn’t it? A logistical
challenge, anyway, there’s no
challange, anyway, there’s no
getting
challenge, anyway, there’s no
getting away from that? Yes, it is,
but, as Donna said, you could have
it today and then you run out
tomorrow and that’s not very
helpful, so probably my advice to
the Secretary of State, please
promise less and deliver more. Yeah.
just promised
Just promised less and deliver more.
just promised less and deliver more.
You ran
Just promised less and deliver more.
You can have the numbers and
You ran have the numbers and
figures. The
You can have the numbers and
figures. The question is if the
delivery is lagging behind what is
required then ask again the
industries in this country to work
all the hours that God gives them to
deliver this PPE to those who need
it and also that it must be
appropriate to the person. I’ve got
a friend who is a nurse, where she
was given a mask but it was far too
big and it didn’t quite do the job
in the end, so make sure that the
equipment is appropriate to the
person who is doing this and make
sure there isn’t a supply that runs
out. So, promise less, deliver more.
Yvette, we have had one tweet in
here, we have had quite a lot on
PPE, but one which struck me... Why
PPE, but one which stmck me... why
is there no
PPE, but one which struck me... Why
is there no PPE available anywhere
for carers coming into vulnerable
people’s homes? This is the area
that I am most worried about, the
position for social care, that means
position for social rare, that means
peopla going
position for social care, that means
people going into people’s homes,
peopla going into people’s homes,
but
people going into people’s homes,
but also in care homes as well. I
but also in rare homes as well. I
have
but also in care homes as well. I
have heard from carers who are
really worried because they go from
one home to another, they’re really
one home to another, therre really
worried
one home to another, they’re really
worried that they might be spreading
the virus inadvertently, as well as
being worried about having the
proper protection if they are caring
proper protection if they are raring
for people
proper protection if they are caring
for people who are ill. 50, I think
for peopla who are ill. So, I think
the social
for people who are ill. So, I think
the social care side to me feels one
the social rare side to me feels one
of the
the social care side to me feels one
of the most urgent to increase.
Also, that I think when you’re
dealing with something where you
need enough PPE for sometimes thing
moving very quickly, then you need
oversupply in each area, in each
community. So,
community. 50, US saying nationally,
community. So, us saying nationally,
we might have enough totally if we
get all of the logistics right —
get all of the logistic right -
actually
get all of the logistics right —
actually we need much more than
that, in order to have the leeway
whenever it is needed. We had our
[oral hospice at
local hospice at the beginning of
[oral hospice at the beginning of
the week,
local hospice at the beginning of
the week, somebody got in touch
because they were worried that they
were going to run out of PPE within
were going to mn out of PPE within
24 hours
were going to run out of PPE within
2A hours and might have to discharge
24 hours and might have to discharge
patients.
2A hours and might have to discharge
patients. Everybody pulled round,
all of the other bits of the local
all of the other bits of the [oral
NHS
all of the other bits of the local
NHS made sure that they could
provide the PPE, and we also had
suppUes
supplies from the local FE College,
everybody pulling together. It is
really uncomfortable to having the
last of the local FE College for
last of the [oral FE College for
some
last of the local FE College for
some of the supplies that they need,
that does not feel like that is the
“Y
way we want to be running things,
way we want to be mnning things,
but it’s a great
way we want to be running things,
but it’s a great example of
everybody pulling together. But if
you had enough in each area to be
able to manage that, then that would
be easier. And I think when we are
at a time, when it comes to social
rare, for our
care, for our carers and also our
rare, for our carers and also our
NHS staff, they
care, for our carers and also our
NHS staff, they are having to do the
most incredible thing is, they are
having to save lives, to care for
having to save lives, to rare for
those
having to save lives, to care for
those who are dying, to face this
horrible virus, really, the least
that we can do is to make sure that
that we ran do is to make sure that
they have the
that we can do is to make sure that
they have the protection that they
need. That example is a very good
one. St—Pierre school, which is a
one. St-Pierre school, which is a
pub“:
public school,
one. St—Pierre school, which is a
public school, because children have
gone home, they really dedicated and
gave all their PPE to your hospital.
-- to York
—— to York Hospital. The whole lot.
-- to York Hospital. The whola lot.
-- St Peter’s.
—— to York Hospital. The whole lot.
—— St Peter’s. And that was a
-- St Peter’s. And that was a
fantastic help.
—— St Peter’s. And that was a
fantastic help. But in the end,
please, Secretary of State,
production has got to work overtime,
in order that, as Yvette Cooper
said, actually, there is enough not
just for today but for the following
two weeks, three weeks, four weeks.
And get all the factories to do the
same. Burberry is now producing
gowns and using its supply chain to
get masks in. All of that kind of
thing, let’s
thing, let’sjust gear up
get masks in. All of that kind of
thing, let’s just gear up and get
all of those parts of our industry
supporting our NHS as well, because
I think people really want to. And
I think peopla really want to. And
we have
I think people really want to. And
we have to recognise that if we
don’t provide for social care or in
don’t provide for social rare or in
the community,
don’t provide for social care or in
the community, it will
the community, it willjust put a
the community, it will just put a
burden
the community, it willjust put a
burden on the hospital. We represent
nurses both in the independent
sector, in the community, and social
rare,
care, and there are carers that also
rare, and there are carers that also
need this
care, and there are carers that also
need this equipment, otherwise we
will burden the hospitals and not be
able to look after people in the
able to look after peoplo in the
community.
able to look after people in the
community. And we will need to do
that, because we will reach capacity
in hospitals very soon, so we have
got a number of other questions, one
that has just
that hasjust come
got a number of other questions, one
that has just come in online,
that hasjust come in online, and it
that has just come in online, and it
says, this is
that hasjust come in online, and it
says, this is mainly for you, Matt,
of course, we’re delighted that you
are here with us, and recovered...
It says, should the UK align its
advice with the WHO guidelines that
people with Covid—19 can still be
infectious for M days after
recovering? Donna is going like this
conscious you are back here after
seven days, so why the difference?
You might not be surprised to hear
that I did check this before coming
out of self isolation. Surprised and
relieved?! And the clear medical
advice from the Chief Medical
Officer, who has looked into this,
is that the transmission tends to
stop before seven days, and seven
days is the appropriate amount of
time. Donna is looking rather
sceptical. I am very sceptical
because I think the evidence is
unclear about whether you’re still
carrying, after the seven days.
Well, this is an important point,
that I continue to behave as if,
like everybody else, it is not that
because I have had it, I have a free
pass now. I self—isolate the same as
pass now. I self-isolate the same as
anybody else.
pass now. I self—isolate the same as
anybody else. So it’s important that
peopla who
people who have been through it, we
don’t yet have the science to know
that they are immune and completely
dear.
clear. That science isn’t clear, as
dear. That science isn’t clear, as
you say. But
clear. That science isn’t clear, as
you say. But they advice on coming
out of self isolation after seven
days is something that we went
through with great rigour with the
Chief Medical Officer. But it is an
interesting point, so, if you’ve had
it, after seven days, you should
still effectively self—isolate,
social distancing we should all be
doing that anyway...? Yeah, when the
science is good enough to understand
the immunity that people have after
the immunity that peopla have after
having had the
the immunity that people have after
having had the disease, then we are
looking at introducing something
like an immunity certificate, or
maybe a wristband, that says, I’ve
had it and I’m
had itand I’m immune and I can’t
had it and I’m immune and I can’t
pass it on and I
had itand I’m immune and I can’t
pass it on and I and highly unlikely
to catch it. And we think that we
will be able to get there. But as of
today, the scientists are not
confident enough in understanding
the progress of the disease after
people have got through it, like I
peopla have got through it, like I
have, and
people have got through it, like I
have, and so therefore, the advice
remains executive same. It’s one of
these areas, and there are lots of
them with coronavirus, where we are
them with coronavims, where we are
living in a world of
them with coronavirus, where we are
living in a world of uncertainty,
where the science is not yet clear.
Donna is certainly agreeing with you
on that! Literally, we know that you
have an antibody to the virus, that
you had. But whether you can be
re—infected or not is not clear, the
re-infected or not is not clear, the
science is
re—infected or not is not clear, the
science is not clear on that. Do you
think the science is clear on the 1A
think the science is clear on the 14
days versus the
think the science is clear on the 1A
days versus the seven days? Do you
think the WHO is wrong to say 1A
think the WHO is wrong to say 14
days? Here, I
think the WHO is wrong to say 1A
days? Here, Ifollow
days? Here, I follow the
think the WHO is wrong to say 1A
days? Here, Ifollow the Chief
Medical Officer very precisely, and
he has looked into it in great
detail and made the decision about
seven days, and I asked exactly that
question. And also whether you
should take a precautionary approach
on it if it is not clear? That’s
right. We had exactly that
discussion and he went and looked at
the best science and made that
decision must I would like to take a
couple of points now, I am going to
take two consecutive points from two
peopla. I
peopla. Ilost
take two consecutive points from two
people. I lost my dad over two
peopla. I lost my dad over two
months ago
people. I lost my dad over two
months ago from pneumonia. My
85-year-old
85—year—old mum has underlying
85-year-old mum has undertying
health
85—year—old mum has underlying
health conditions and falls into the
vulnerable category. She is
self—isolating and unable to have
self-isolating and unabla to have
contact
self—isolating and unable to have
contact with most of her family. I
haven’t seen her for over three
weeks. Being separated from us is
having a negative impact on her
mental well—being. Are you able to
mental well-being. Are you able to
tell me
mental well—being. Are you able to
tell me with any certainty when I
will safely be able to see her
again? Earlier
again? Earlierthis
will safely be able to see her
again? Earlier this week,
again? Earlierthis week, my
will safely be able to see her
again? Earlier this week, my wife
again? Eadier this week, my wife
lost her
again? Earlier this week, my wife
lost her nan to Covid—19. She was
lost her nan to Covid-19. She was
fortunate
lost her nan to Covid—19. She was
fortunate enough in one of her final
few moments to have one of her
daughters at her bedside. I know
this has not been the case for every
this has not been the use for every
family. A lovely
this has not been the case for every
family. A lovely tribute was paid to
her on the front page of a
Kidderminster newspaper today. How
ran we
can we support those who are in
ran we support those who are in
grieving and
can we support those who are in
grieving and self isolation at this
time? john,
time? John, we’re hearing so many,
time? john, we’re hearing so many,
frankly,
time? John, we’re hearing so many,
frankly, heartbreaking stories of
peopla who
people who have lost their life
peopla who have lost their life
partner and
people who have lost their life
partner and then in the loneliness
of that position, have to be even
more alone, self—isolating, or
more alone, self-isolating, or
families
more alone, self—isolating, or
families who can’t mourn together?
On the BBC News at Six o’clock, they
had a story of a rabbi who died, and
he had been married with his Wi—Fi
he had been married with his wi-Fi
think
he had been married with his Wi—Fi
think about 60 years, and she
couldn’t go even to the funeral. The
undertaker had to do the funeral.
What I have not fully understood, if
undertakers handle the bodies and
undertakes handle the bodies and
are able
undertakers handle the bodies and
are able to take those bodies to be
cremated, or to be buried, why in
this particular case didn’t they
this particular use didn’t they
allow
this particular case didn’t they
allow at least the son, who is quite
young, to be present, and numbers
restricted? And I think what is
going to be haunting her
going to be haunting herfor the
going to be haunting her for the
rest of
going to be haunting herfor the
rest of her life, I think, they had
been married and never separated, I
could not visit him because he had
Covid-19, and
Covid—19, and even in death I wasn’t
Covid-19, and even in death I wasn’t
allowed to go to
Covid—19, and even in death I wasn’t
allowed to go to the burial grounds.
I find that difficult. But I think
the government has got to think this
one through, because people who...
And I ran
And I can understand why they don’t
And I ran understand why they don’t
allow peopla
And I can understand why they don’t
allow people to visit, because of
the virus, but I don’t understand
why a family could not be by the
graveside, or in the crematorium,
provided the numbers are restricted.
And if people are just simply buried
And if peopla are just simply buried
and then
And if people are just simply buried
and then later on, when it is all
over, you go and see the grave and
you 5“-
you say, I wish I was there. So,
peopla are
people are grieving doubly. Not
peopla are grieving doubly. Not
being
people are grieving doubly. Not
being allowed to be present when
they die. And I think that is very,
very difficult. I think the
restrictions, for example, that
there should be no funerals in
churches, I think that is a right
decision, and people being buried or
cremated, but can the Secretary of
cremated, but ran the Secretary of
State explain
cremated, but can the Secretary of
State explain why, if undertakers
State explain why, if undertakes
handle
State explain why, if undertakers
handle the body, put it in a coffin,
handla the body, put it in a coffin,
then take
handle the body, put it in a coffin,
then take it to the crematorium or
the burial ground, why a member of
the family, with clear social
distancing, could not be present?
Well, it’s heartbreaking and we back
more and more people who have known
more and more peopla who have known
somebody who
more and more people who have known
somebody who has died, and it’s
somebody who has died, and it’sjust
somebody who has died, and it’s just
awful.
somebody who has died, and it’sjust
awful. There’s two people I was very
awful. There’s two peopla I was very
fond of
awful. There’s two people I was very
fond of have died, and it’s starting
to have that impact. In response to
this precise question, John, your
this precise question, john, your
instincts
this precise question, John, your
instincts are right. We have
guidance for funerals that was put
together, including with an ethics
together, including with an ethis
panel which
together, including with an ethics
panel which includes representatives
of all the major faiths,
of all the majorfaiths, and
panel which includes representatives
of all the major faiths, and that
advice doesn’t say that families,
dose
close family, can go to a funeral.
close family, ran go to a funeral.
So, I don’t
close family, can go to a funeral.
So, I don’t know the specifics of
So, I don’t know the specific of
this
So, I don’t know the specifics of
this individual case, but we must
this individual use, but we must
make
this individual case, but we must
make sure that that guidance, which
rightly, as you say, says that the
numbers shouldn’t be large, that
that guidance is followed, and I can
that guidance is followed, and I ran
only think that
that guidance is followed, and I can
only think that the wife might have
been in the right category, which
means that for her own protection,
she should not see anybody or leave
the house. But if we need to make
that clearer in the guidance, then
that dearer in the guidance, then
we
that clearer in the guidance, then
we absolutely will. And maybe we
could talk about it afterwards,
because decisions like that, of
course, have to be based on the
pub“:
public health advice, but really
need to be taken by faith leaders
need to be taken byfaith leaders
making
need to be taken by faith leaders
making recommendations, alongside
the epidemiologists and the doctors,
to make sure that we get this right.
So, I
So, Ithink
to make sure that we get this right.
So, I think that the advice clearly
So, I think that the advice dearty
needs to
So, I think that the advice clearly
needs to be explained more clearly,
needs to be explained more dearty,
even if
needs to be explained more clearly,
even if the circumstances are, as
you 5“-
you say, from that example, and
let’s try to fix that. Coming back
to
to the question from Govita, whose
85-year-old
85—year—old mother is now a widow,
85-year-old mother is now a widow,
having lost her
85—year—old mother is now a widow,
having lost her husband, she is 85,
she has to be shielded, so she’s all
alone in her home, and for a number
of people who are tragically in that
situation now, how can they find
situation now, how ran they find
comfort
situation now, how can they find
comfort in this situation that we
all find ourselves in?
all find ourselves in? Well, my
mother eventually died of cancer and
I was by her bedside for seven days.
I think in this particular case, if
I think in this particular use, if
that was my
I think in this particular case, if
that was my mum, I can hear the
that was my mum, Iran hear the
guidance that
that was my mum, I can hear the
guidance that you shouldn’t take the
infection there, this is why I think
testing is important. If I am tested
and I know that I haven’t got the
virus at all, I think I would go and
be with my grandmother. And then not
leave the home until everything is
clear, because you could actually
dear, because you could actually
infect
clear, because you could actually
infect other people. So, I actually
infect other peopla. So, I actually
think
infect other people. So, I actually
think the guidance in terms of
raring for the
caring for the relations is quite
raring for the relations is quite
important.
caring for the relations is quite
important. Again, Donna was right,
communities are working hard and it
is in those communities, this
particular virus could actually
spread widely if people are not
tested. 50, I
tested. 50, Iwould
spread widely if people are not
tested. 50, I would be
tested. 50, Iwould be screaming
tested. So, Iwould be screaming
with my
tested. 50, Iwould be screaming
with my hospital that I need a test,
so that if I have not got it, I must
go and spend the rest of this self
exclusion with my relative. You’re
right, because she, her
right, because she, herworld is
right, because she, her world is
cmmbling in
right, because she, herworld is
crumbling in all kinds of ways, and
cmmbling in all kinds of ways, and
how ran it
crumbling in all kinds of ways, and
how can it be brought together,
how ran it be brought together,
other
how can it be brought together,
other than a member of the family
getting the test and be unable to go
getting the test and be unabla to go
and
getting the test and be unable to go
and spend time with her, until the
government removes these reductions?
Let me ask you about this one, we
have had a message in this point
from someone... I am so disturbed
that peopla are
that people are dying from Covid—19
that peopla are dying from Covid-19
in isolation,
that people are dying from Covid—19
in isolation, without any family. Is
it not possible, she goes on to say,
to give PPE to at least one family
member so that patients don’t have
to die alone? Not in any sense
underestimating quite what a
challenge that is for nurses, I
mean, when we heard about the
13-year-old
13—year—old boy who died, I have to
13-year-old boy who died, I have to
say, I
say, Icried
13-year-old boy who died, I have to
say, I cried when I
13—year—old boy who died, I have to
say, I cried when I heard that, the
thought of a child dying alone is
just unbearable. Is there anyway
around it?
ii
It wouldn’t surprise you that nurses
are thinking about this. I popped
into the XL earlier this week to
into the XL eartier this week to
talk to
into the XL earlier this week to
talk to nurses about how they are
doing end—of—life care and they are
doing end-of-life rare and they are
thinking about
doing end—of—life care and they are
thinking about how they can have
thinking about how they ran have
family
thinking about how they can have
family members communicating. We’ve
had donations of mobile phones so
that actually nurses can talk with
that actually nurses ran talk with
the
that actually nurses can talk with
the patient’s’ relatives
the patient’s’ relatives as they are
delivering
delivering care by the bedside but
delivering rare by the bedside but
it’s why it’s
delivering care by the bedside but
it’s why it’s so important that we
ramp up the manufacturing of PPE
because actually then you can start
because actually then you ran start
doing things
because actually then you can start
doing things like giving it to
peopla
people that can go into the homes,
peopla that ran go into the homes,
if
people that ran go into the homes,
if they are
people that can go into the homes,
if they are adequately protected.
So, of
50, of course it’s not
if they are adequately protected.
50, of course it’s notjust the
So, of course it’s not just the
health
So, of course it’s notjust the
health care worker that may need it
health rare worker that may need it
but actually
health care worker that may need it
but actually when somebody is in
isolation and actually it’s
affecting their mental health we may
need to do something very different.
Yvette? . Sorry, John is yellow your
Yvette? . Sorry, john is yellow your
hospital has
Yvette? . Sorry, John is yellow your
hospital has started giving patients
who are in isolation iPads and
iPhones so they can get in touch
iPhones so they ran get in touch
with
iPhones so they can get in touch
with their relations and of course
then after it’s used properly
disinfected, and I think this should
be the way of assuring people that
be the way of assuring peopla that
they ran
be the way of assuring people that
they ran get
they can get in touch with their
they ran get in touch with their
loved
they can get in touch with their
loved ones and then they can
loved ones and then they ran
actually
loved ones and then they can
actually see their faces and see
them and without that actually you
are almost isolating the person and
then when they don’t see their body
being buried again you are creating
another heart wrenching exercise so
-- another
—— another heart—rending exercise.
-- another heart-rending exercise.
So get in touch
—— another heart—rending exercise.
50 get in touch with some clergy who
So get in touch with some clergy who
may be in touch with chaplains in
hospitals, like in York, they get in
touch with the clergy and tell the
person how they are doing, and this
needs to be a sort of community
exercise in which we make it
possible if you are able to
communicate to do it safely and then
they will know where the illness is
taking this people. But to die alone
taking this peopla. But to die alone
and not
taking this people. But to die alone
and not knowing since you went in
there is very difficult fuzz.
there is very difficult I think it’s
important to say most nurses don’t
allow peopla
allow people to die alone. Certainly
allow peopla to die alone. Certainly
if
allow peoplo to die alone. Certainly
if you are in
allow people to die alone. Certainly
if you are in hospital you will have
a nurse, it’s not the same as your
family, but most nurses are very
conscious of that. One of my own
stuff, her mother recently died and
she described the way in which
people bent over backwards to
facilitate her ability to
communicate with her mother and she
was a nurse but she was really
grateful in her hour of need that
actually we did facilitate her being
able to communicate with her mother
before she died. 50, it is
before she died. So, it is possible.
We just have to
before she died. 50, it is possible.
We just have to find innovative ways
of doing it because both shielding
individuals that might be vulnerable
but also stopping the spread fuzz
but also stopping the spread fun
yet I think
but also stopping the spread fuzz
yet I think nurses are doing an
amazing job to do that and we are
very grateful but it’s one of the
cruellest things about this virus.
cmellest things about this vims.
It’s not only
cruellest things about this virus.
It’s not only leaving people to die
It’s not only leaving peopla to die
without
It’s not only leaving people to die
without their family around them but
also leaving people to grieve on
their own as well, so I think the
starring effect,
scarring effect, the emotionally
starring effect, the emotionally
starring
scarring effect, the emotionally
scarring effects of this crisis,
however long it takes us to come
through this, are going to be huge
for medical staff that will have
worked in these environments, but
also for
also forfamilies
worked in these environments, but
also for families who will have lost
relatives without being able to be
with them and it feels that we need
to also be investing in what those
support services should be for
families in terms of dealing with
those bereavements and as we
increase the testing, given what
Matt said about the testing, I think
we should look at whether the sum of
those community tests could be
prioritised for those who have lost
loved ones so that you don’t end up
with a widow who has lost her
husband and then her daughter can’t
even go round to visit. If both mum
and daughter could just be tested
and then they could be together in
order to grieve. I’m going to move
on very quickly but I wanted to read
you this tweet that has come in from
Tracy Sturgess. My
Tracy Stu rgess. My greatest
you this tweet that has come in from
Tracy Sturgess. My greatest worry is
if my child, who has additional
needs and a potentially life
limiting illness, should he become
ill he wouldn’t understand why I
couldn’t go with him to hospital and
it would break me and him. In this
circumstance could I go to hospital
with him? Lots of things to think
about there. Let me get this last
point it if I ran,
point it if I can, we’ve just about
point it if I ran, we’ve just about
got time, on a
point it if I can, we’ve just about
got time, on a different subject.
From Richard Tums. Good evening. As
a retired police of his what are the
panel’s views on how the police are
currently enforcing social
distancing and how can they complete
distancing and how ran they complete
this
distancing and how can they complete
this difficult role whilst at the
this difficult rola whilst at the
same
this difficult role whilst at the
same time continuing to police by
consent? Yvette, I wanted to ask
what you think about, there’s been
some controversy about some of the
things police forces are doing. I
think the police are in a difficult
position because everything is
moving so fast. The regulations
coming on the Thursday and they
immediately need to be enforced and
that’s an inevitable consequence of
the pace this is all moving. They
have been some examples where I
think therve
think they’ve been miss
have been some examples where I
think they’ve been missjudgments
think therve been miss judgments
made
think they’ve been missjudgments
made all the police have not got the
balance right, but overall I think
the approach of placing an certainly
senior police officers that’s been
reflected in the national guidance
reﬂacted in the national guidance
we’ve
reflected in the national guidance
we’ve now seen is that enforcement
is a last resort, the police’s role
is a last resort, the police’s rola
is to
is a last resort, the police’s role
is to encourage,
is to encourage, to engage. Most
people really want to abide by the
regulations. Most people want to do
regulations. Most peopla want to do
the right
regulations. Most people want to do
the right thing because this is
about our health. The police want to
do the right thing. It’s important
that it is done in a proportionate
way. It’s done in a way that
supports the community. Our
tradition in this country has been
policing by consent. Working in the
police with the community, that’s
what they want to do. In Knottingley
what they want to do. In Knottinglay
[oral police
what they want to do. In Knottingley
local police officers were
delivering lunches for a lunch club
that has closed yesterday afternoon,
that’s the spirit of policing we
want to see. Andrew Stephenson says
there’s too many cars on the road,
peopla are
people are driving on them to go out
peopla are driving on them to go out
I haven’t
people are driving on them to go out
I haven’t seen checkpoints or police
anywhere in the Medway towns. What
anywhere in the Medway towns. what
is your feeling
anywhere in the Medway towns. What
is your feeling about the role of
the police so far? I would agree
with Yvette Cooper that there are
some examples that are not very
good, but on the whole what I’ve
seen on the media is that actually
some police officers are courteous
but they make it very clear they
but they make it very dear they
should
but they make it very clear they
should still not be moving around
unless they are really doing
something that is important and
necessary, just going about is not
good enough really. We haven’t
experienced this country, in this
country of the police being given
such powers but they are limited and
they are going to be reviewed and I
want to encourage all my fellow
citizens, please follow the
government guidance and if the
police talk to you courteously they
are not wanting to take away your
liberty or freedom because this is a
tragedy for all of us and because
it’s a tragedy, behave in such a way
that all you ran
that all you can do is do no wrong.
that all you ran do is do no wrong.
Do no wrong to
that all you can do is do no wrong.
Do no wrong to yourself or anybody
else. I just
else. Ijust hope that the chief
constables reinforce the message
that actually the first of your role
that actually the first of your rola
is to
that actually the first of your role
is to persuade, is to encourage and
fines are really a last resort.
Don’t go there very quickly. This
lady was talking from York to
Newcastle and given such a hefty
Nemsﬂa and given such a hefty
fine, I’m
Newcastle and given such a hefty
fine, I’m going to find out what
happened, I don’t think that gives
us a good place. On the other hand
there is some people who don’t take
seriously that this is a deadly
virus which could kill any others so
please for the sake of yourself,
your neighbour, your
your neighbour, yourfriend, your
your neighbour, your friend, your
children, your
your neighbour, yourfriend, your
children, your community, stay at
home, you know? And protect the
lives of other people. We’ve had a
lives of other peopla. We’ve had a
tweeting from
lives of other people. We’ve had a
tweeting from Chrissie Crellin, I’ll
get your comment, Matt, she says it
was commented on the other day that
vehicle use has increased, the
police on the radio confirmed the
same day that you can drive to
somewhere close by to go for a walk.
somewhere dose by to go for a walk.
Is this right or
somewhere close by to go for a walk.
Is this right or not? It seems to be
a daily argument online. People are
a bit confused about that kind of
thing. Overall the number of people
who are following the rules is very,
who are following the mles is very,
very high and I
who are following the rules is very,
very high and I agree very strongly
with what Yvette said that policing
by consent is the way we do it and I
think some of the stories in the
media have been a bit overblown and
weren’t quite what they first were
reported as. I think that being able
to go out and take exercises
important. The key thing is always
to come back to the original public
health reason is that the advice is
to stay at home, which is to not
come into close contact with other
peopla. So, to
people. So, to get in your car and
peopla. So, to get in your far and
drive a
people. So, to get in your car and
drive a short distance to then go
for a walk on your own or maybe with
your dog, that is fine because you
are not coming into contact with
another person and the advice is
really clear about that. We do want
peopla to
people to take exercise because I
really am worried about the mental
health concerns that we discussed
already and we know that exercise is
good for your mental and physical
health. So,
health. 50, follow the rules, stay
health. So, follow the mles, stay
at home,
health. 50, follow the rules, stay
at home, that protect the NHS, and
it will save lives. Do take
exercise, but, when you do it, don’t
go near anybody else who isn’t in
your household. Matt, you have made
it clear. Our hour is up. I’m
pleased to say Question Time is back
next week and for the foreseeable
future at 8pm. This evening our
recorded questions came from rugby.
Next week we are looking for
questions from people who live in
questions from peopla who live in
and
questions from people who live in
and around Uxbridge. To take part in
the programme go to the Question
Time website, applying the usual way
and we’ll ask a number of you to
record your questions and
record your questions and send them
in, just like this evening. If you
want to have your say you can go to
want to have your say you ran go to
Adrian
want to have your say you can go to
Adrian Childs and guests on Question
Time Extra Time on five live now. I
want to say thank you very much to
the panel, Matt, John, thank you for
the panel, Matt, john, thank you for
joining us from
the panel, Matt, John, thank you for
joining us from York. I wasn’t clear
how it was going to work but I think
it’s worked brilliantly so thank you
so much. Thank you to everyone who
recorded a question got in touch
duﬂng
during the programme and to you at
home for watching. For now, stay
well, stay at home. From Question
Time, bye-bye.
Remember when the news
was nothing but...
Brexit!
Brexit deal to deal with Brexit.
Oven—ready Brexit.
Back to face a new challenge...
I’m feeling nostalgic for
the Brexit question!
There’s only two ways to get
out of a bad deal, son.
You either negotiate your way clear,
or something happens
beyond your control.
You have got to talk to Emily.
How long before all goes...pff?
Your break—up with Sephy.
What was the reason?
Callum McGregor.
A pretty little bird told us.
Went straight to her father.
My baba’s handed himself in.
He’s saying he did it, to save me.
But he didn’t do it, though!
Of course he didn’t!
£20,000. And what do you get
for that?
This never happening again.
There’s going to be
a vote of no confidence.
And you’re not going to win it.
I’m sorry.
Ryan McGregor. I am mindful of
your obvious remorse.
There is an argument
to make an example of you.
Come with me.
MAN SHOUTS
Don’t get involved.
This programme contains
some strong language
TV: I’m not saying
it’s definitive, no.
But given the newly—appointed PM’s
previous hardline stance
and comments, it seems plausible
we’ll see far stricter provisions
for law and order
implemented sooner
rather than later.
More on that in a moment.
However, some breaking newsjust in.
We’re receiving word that
the terrorist Ryan McGregor,
otherwise known as
The Detonator of Demwa, has died.
This is breaking news
just coming in...
CUP SHATI’ERS
..so details are scarce
at the moment.
We will bring you more updates
as soon as we have more information.
FOOTSTEPS APPROACH
VOICE ON TV BECOMES DISTANT
Mama, are you 0K?